>> Alzheimer's disease is on
the rise and has become one
of the more alarming
public health issues.
But what if, by using a holistic
approach to treating this
disease, there was a way
to prevent and even reverse
the onset of Alzheimer's?
>> So there's a background.
All of this new work,
this new exciting work,
is because we have a foundation
of what doesn't work.
>> This is "Gaia News."
[THEME MUSIC]
Researchers have studied the
disease for over a century.
And while they've come to
understand the mechanisms that
lead to Alzheimer's,
there haven't
been significant breakthroughs
in finding a viable treatment
to prevent patients' decline
into dementia and death.
Dr. Ilene Naomi Rusk is a
behavioral neuroscientist
and co-director of
the Healthy Brain
Program in Boulder, Colorado.
Dr. Rusk is one of
many doctors who
now ascribes to the protocols
of Dr. Dale Bredesen, which
show that a personalized
holistic approach
to Alzheimer's can not
only prevent the disease
but even reverse its
onset in early phases.
But when she began
her work, they
were looking for
one single cure.
>> I started in this
field in the '80s looking
at single-targeted strategies
for dementia thinking that
there would be a silver bullet
because that's the way we
thought-- receptor's specificity
working particularly with
a targeted approach
to one brain chemical.
For example, acetylcholine
would be the answer.
It turns out it
isn't the answer.
So there's a background.
All of this new work,
this new exciting work
in the area of dementia, is
because we have a foundation
of what doesn't work.
If you spoke to any neurologist,
any neuropsychologist,
any physician,
they would say, no,
we don't really
have anything that's
disease modifying for
Alzheimer's disease and nothing
that slows progression
rates significantly.
It certainly lends
credence to a new approach.
And the new approach
to me emerged in 2016
when I read a paper
by Dr. Bredesen.
>> In a proof of
concept trial, Dr.
Bredesen looked at 25
patients suffering from
Alzheimer's disease and
evaluated their cognitive
ability before and after they
followed protocols that focused
on a number of lifestyle and
environmental factors believed
to contribute to Alzheimer's.
>> So some of those root causes
are nutritional imbalances,
difficulties with gut health,
toxins in food and air
and water--
things like mold,
air pollution--
the effects of combined
prescription medication--
polypharmacy, for example.
I'd say that there are external
mediated root factors too,
root causes, and
modifiable contributors,
like how much we exercise.
I said that the food we
eat, but the nutrition
we derive from the
food we eat as well.
And remember that Alzheimer's
disease particularly
seeds itself very early.
So the amyloid and tau
begin to create problems up
to 20-plus years prior to
the actual clinical symptoms
of the disease.
>> Interestingly, Dr. Bredesen
found a large contributor
to Alzheimer's was a
lack of neuroplasticity,
or the brain's ability to
grow new neural pathways.
Neuroplasticity has been found
to be boosted by activities
that challenge the
brain, particularly
those that fall outside our
daily habits and routines.
>> Neuroplasticity
requires a challenge--
what I like to call a
disorienting dilemma
for the nervous system,
which means stress,
which means good stress.
Good stress provides
healthy neuroplastic change.
Bad stress provides negative
neuroplastic change.
>> In addition to a lack
of activity supporting
neuroplasticity, improper
sleep has also been found to be
a major factor in the onset of
Alzheimer's, so much so that
some studies have found a
20% to 30% increased risk
in the development of
Alzheimer's and dementia
in patients who don't
get sufficient rest.
>> I think sleep is one of the
most modifiable and important
contributors-- what
happens at night,
what we take to sleep with
us, whether we're stressed,
whether we have sleep apnea.
So if we're losing
oxygen at night,
we're a little bit hypoxic,
a little low on oxygen.
That can really affect
our brain health.
Sleep is a huge contributor
to cognitive decline
and then to later dementia.
Actually, a recent
study has shown
that sleep patterns in mid-life,
so earlier in life prior
to people getting dementia,
contribute to later dementia
risk.
So basically if you're getting
less than six hours of sleep--
I think it's less than seven
hours of sleep in your 50s
or 60s-- it can contribute
to later cognitive
decline and dementia.
You're 30% more likely to
get dementia later in life.
>> As more research considers
this personalized multi-factor
approach that assesses
the various root causes
of dementia,
practitioners like Dr.
Rusk says she believes will
be able to drastically reduce
the number of new Alzheimer's
sufferers, with Dr.
Bredesen going so far as to
say we may someday eliminate it
altogether.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.